Exp No: 11 
               STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS OF BEAM WITH DIFFERENT BOUNDARY 
 
 
                        Aim: To perform analysis of Beam structure with different boundary. 
 
The following sequence lists the steps involved in defining a continuous span line beam, and 
analyzing it to produce dead load effects, temperature and shrinkage effects and envelopes of 
moving load effects. Links are included to the relevant help topics. More complete step by step 
guidance is contained in the Examples documentation. 
 
 
       Step 1: Start new Project 
 
                                      In the Main Menu select File | New | Blank Project 
 
 
In the Main Menu select Data | Structure Type | Line Beam 
 
Step 2: Add Design Beams 
 
In the Navigation Pane select the Design Beams group. 
 
Click on the Add button and either define a new Design Beam of required type or add an existing 
Design Beam. If adding an existing beam, this beam can remain as a linked file (useful if used in more 
than one project) or embedded in the project by clicking on the Break Link button. 
 
For new Design Beam creation refer to the geometry steps of the Data Preparation Overview for Steel 
Composite beams, Prestressed beams, or Reinforced Concrete beams. 
 
Step 3: Define the Span details 
 
In the Navigation Pane select the Structure Definition group. 
 
Click on the Structure Geometry icon and populate the Line Beam Geometry form. 
 
Step 4: Assign the Design Beams to the relevant Line Beam Spans 
 
Click on the Active Group Function Create Section and Beam Groups to create one Structure 
Property group for each design beam. 
 
Click on a Structure Property beam group item. 
 
In the graphics window select a gray (unassigned) span (Note the 'Select' drop-down should be at its 
default Create setting). Green spans are already assigned to other beams. 
 
Warnings are given if appropriate and the Design Beam is assigned to the span (which then becomes 
red). 
 
Make any edits to the Structure Properties: Beam form and click OK to save the assignment. 
 
Continue until Design Beams are assigned to all spans. 
 
Step 5: Generate Loads and Analyze 
 
In the Main Menu select Data | Automated Loading, and click on Analyze 
  
24  
Step 6: Analyze for Dead Loads, Temperature effects and Shrinkage / Creep effects 
 
On the same form, click on the Dead and SDL Loading tab, and Analyze 
 
Step 7: Transfer Results to the Design Beams for design / code checking 
 
On the same form, click on the Transfer Beam Load button, and select a beam by pointing and 
clicking on the associated span. Then complete the Transfer Mapped Results form for assigning 
Analysis results to Design Beam effects, and click the Transfer to Design Beam button (or the Save 
to Design Beam file button if the Design Beam is linked to the project). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Result: Thus analysis of structure have been performed using different boundary on CAD.