Exp No: 1 INTRODUCTION TO COMPUTER AIDED DESIGN 
 
 
Introduction 
 
CATIA V5 is a powerful software package yet has a relatively short learning curve. One of 
the reasons for the short learning curve is that it is fully Windows compatible and the processes are 
consistent across the workbenches, toolbars and tools. If you learn the basics of a particular 
workbench the same process can be used for more complex problems. Several tools are   used in 
more than one workbench. 
 
The lessons in this workbook present basic real life design problems (when possible) and 
the workbenches, toolbars, and tools required to solve the problem. The lessons present this 
information with step-by-step instructions. For every step there are numerous possible methods 
of accomplishing the same thing. The steps are to be used as guides to solving the design problem. 
You are encouraged to try new and different methods, find the method that works for you. 
 
The CATIA Acronym 
 
The CATIA acronym stands for: “Computer Aided Three Dimensional Interactive 
Application”. V5 stands for Version 5. 
 
A Brief History of CATIA 
 
CATIA was developed by Dassault Systemes in the early 1980’s and quickly emerged as 
an industry leader. CATIA V5 is different from V4 and earlier versions because it was programmed 
to take advantage of the MS Windows capability while maintaining the UNIX power and stability. 
As a user, making the transition to CATIA V5 from CATIA V4 is a huge step. CATIA V5 does 
not resemble CATIA V4 at all; it is new. For Experienced CATIA V4 users often seem to struggle 
with the change at first, until they can let go of the old and embrace the new. The learning curve 
has been greatly reduced, while maintaining the power and significantly improving the flexibility 
and integration. 
With CATIA V5 the designer is not limited by the software but is limited only by his/her 
own ability to put the software to work. CATIA V5 is the engineering package that will lead 
industry into the world of Product Life Cycle Management (PLM). 
 
CATIA Version 5 Basic Concepts 
Upon completion of this course the student should have a full understanding of the following 
topics: 
 - Managing models (opening, closing, saving, etc) - Solutions, Workbenches and Toolbars - Tools, Options - Tools, Customize - Manipulation - View Toolbar  
2  
Setting Up 
1. Start-up is usually very slow….wait patiently. 
2. Menu bar: Tools/Options/Infrastructure/Part Infrastructure/Display …. Display in Specification 
Tree, check all buttons ON. 
3. Menu bar: Tools/Options/Display/Performance/3D Accuracy and 2D Accuracy set to 0.01. 
Press OK to save. 
4. Menu bar: Tools/Options/Mechanical Design/Sketcher/Constraint …. Make sure ‘Creates the 
geometrical constraints’ and ‘Creates the dimensional constraints’ are checked ON. 
5. Create a Folder named as your student (Catia_zID) and put all your files for the tutorial in it 
which will be collected at the end of each class. 
 
6. Setting up steps 1-4 need to be done in every Tutorial Class. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2: The screen that appears after closing the initial product file while starting CATIA 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1. Part Design: Creating positive features from a sketch 
2. Part Design: Creating negative features from a sketch 
3. Part Design: Dress Up features including Threads 
4. Plumbing Part 
5. Examination of Complex Part 
6. Assembly: Manipulation and Constraints 
7. Structural Joint 
8. Mechanical Assembly 
 
Background: CATIA, Version 5, Release 20, Dassault Systems 
Acronym for: Computer Aided Three dimensional Interactive Application  
3  
Workbenches 
1. Part Design workbench 
2. Wireframe and Surface Design workbench 
3. Assembly Design Workbench 
4. Drafting workbench 
 
 
Fig. 1: Basic workbenches in CATIA 
CAT Part 
 
CAT Part is a file extension associated with all the files that are created in the Sketcher, 
Part Design, and Wireframe and Surface Design workbenches. 
CAT Product 
 
CAT Product is a file extension associated with all the files that are created in the 
Assembly Design workbench. 
 
CAT Drawing 
 
CAT Drawing is a file extension associated with all the files that are created in the Drafting 
workbench. 
 
Mouse Operations 
1. Select: Left (L) Button Click. For multiple selections hold the CTRL key along with 
theLeft Button 
2. Contextual menu: Right (R) Button Click 
3. Object Manipulation: Mouse wheel, alone or in combination with L or R button - Hold the middle button and move right or left to pan the object - Press the centre and the right and hold to rotate the object - To zoom hold the middle button and the CTRL key 
Toolbars 
 
1. Unpack and repack specific toolbars by dragging  
4  
2. Expand tools with sub-bars by selecting the black triangle (V) 
3. If you accidentally close, restore the toolbars with Menu bar: 
Tools/Customize/Toolbars/Restore All Contents and Restore position. 
 
 
1. Standard Toolbar 
This toolbar is common to all workbenches of CATIAV5. 
 
 
Fig. 3: The Standard toolbar 
 
2. View Toolbar 
The buttons in the View toolbar are used for manipulating the view of the model. 
 
Fig. 4: The View toolbar 
 
 
3. Sketcher Toolbar 
The Sketcher button in the sketcher toolbar is used to invoke the Sketcher workbench. After 
choosing the Sketcher button, select a plane, or a planar face to invoke the Sketcher workbench. 
You can select the plane and invoke the Sketcher or vice-versa. 
 
 
Fig. 5: The Sketcher toolbar 
 
4. Profile Toolbar 
The tools in the Profile toolbar are used to draw the sketches. It is one of the most important 
toolbars in the Sketcher workbench. 
 
Fig. 6: The Profile toolbar  
5  
 
5. Constraint Toolbar 
The tools in the Constraint toolbar are used to apply constraints to the geometric entities and 
assign dimensions to a drawn sketch. 
 
Fig. 7: The Constraint toolbar 
 
6. Operation Toolbar 
The tools in the Operation toolbar are used to edit the drawn sketches. 
 
Fig. 8: The Operation toolbar 
 
7. Sketch Tools Toolbar 
The tools in the Sketch Tools toolbar are used to set the sketcher settings such as setting the 
snap, switching between the standard and construction elements, and so on. 
 
 
 
Fig. 9: The Sketch Tools toolbar 
 
Once the basic sketch is complete, you need to convert it into a feature. Choose the ‘Exit 
Workbench (icon on the right side of the toolbar, an arrow pointing up)’ button from the 
 
Workbench toolbar and switch back to the Part Design workbench. 
The following toolbars of the Part Design workbench are discussed next. 
 
1. Sketch-Based Features Toolbar 
The tools in the Sketch-Based Features toolbar are used to convert a sketch drawn in the 
Sketcher workbench into a feature. 
  
6  
 
Fig. 10: The Sketch-Based Features toolbar 
 
2. Dress-Up Features Toolbar 
The tools in the Dress-Up Features toolbar are used to apply the dress-up features such as fillet, 
chamfer, shell, and so on. 
 
Fig. 11: The Dress-Up Features toolbar 
3. Transformation Features Toolbar 
The tools in the Transformation Features toolbar are used to apply the transformation features 
to the part such as moving, mirror, pattern, and so on. 
 
Fig. 12: The Transformation Features toolbar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Result: Hence the 2d drawing has been successfully implemented using Computer Aided Design Lab. 
