Exp No: 3  DIMENSION ANNOTATION SYMBOLS WELDING, FINISHING, 
THREADING, TEXT BILL 
OF MATERIALS, TITLE BLOCK 
 
Aim: To implement annotation symbols using CAD. 
 
WELDING SYMBOL: 
1. Click Annotate tab Symbols panel Welding Symbol. 
2. Select an object to attach the weld symbol to. 
3. If you attached the symbol to a line, in the drawing area, specify the start point for the leader. If you 
attached the object to an arc, circle, ellipse or spline, skip to the next step. 
4. Specify one or more points to define the vertices of the leader and press ENTER. 
5. In the Symbol tab, specify the general appearance of the symbol as required. 
To align the position of the arrow side data, the identification line, or direction of the symbol tail to 
the left, in the Options section, select Flip symbol. 
To stagger the alignment of intermittent fillet welds (or ANSI edge welds) on both sides, in the 
Options section, select Stagger. 
To add the all-around designation, click the All-Around button. 
To add a tail to the welding symbol, click the Add Note Tail button. To add a process from a 
predefined list: 
a. Click Add Process. 
b. To prefix process numbers with the statement Process ISO 4063, select the Prefix Process number 
with “Process ISO 4063-”check box. 
Note: This option is not available if the current drafting standard is ANSI. 
c. Double-click the processes to add. 
d. Click Close. 
To edit processes by entering details using the keyboard: 
a. In the box beneath Add Process, click at the position you want to edit. 
b. Enter the process details. 
To delete a process, select it and press the DELETE key To draw a box around the note, select Add 
note frame. 
Note: This button is not available if the current drafting standard is ANSI. 
6. To specify arrow side data: 
a. Click the Weld Type button on the arrow side and select a weld symbol. The available options 
change to match the symbol you select. 
b. Specify parameters. 
7. To specify other side data: 
a. Click the Weld Type button on the other side and select a weld symbol. The available options 
change to match the symbol you select. 
b. Specify parameters. 
8. Click OK. 
Note: To clear all data in the Weld Symbol dialog box, click Clear. 
 
 
 
FINISHING SYMBOL: 
1. Click Insert > Surface Finish. The GET SYMBOL menu appears. 
2. Select one of the following: 
Name—Selects a symbol from the SYMBOL NAMES menu containing a list of symbols that are 
currently in the drawing. 
Pick Inst—Selects a symbol by picking an instance of the symbol in the drawing. Retrieve— 
11  
Retrieves a symbol definition from disk by picking the name from the name list 
menu. Move along the directory tree, when needed, to select the symbol. 
3. Select one of these from the INST ATTACH menu: 
Leader—Creates the symbol with a leader. Select a command from the ATTACH TYPE menu. Entity—
 Attaches the symbol to an entity. 
Normal—Places the symbol normal to an entity. The symbol is positioned with the vertical reference 
pointing up. A yellow arrow, normal to the entity, indicates the symbol positioning. 
No Leader—Creates a symbol without a leader. 
4. Respond to the prompts for the commands you have selected. 
5. Specify a value for the surface roughness. The symbol is placed on the drawing with the size relative to 
the default text height. 
To modify the value of a surface finish, use Value on the MODIFY DRAW menu. 
 
 
THREADING SYMBOL: 
1. Open the file named Tutorial 4 YourProjectName.dwg. We are going to cut M10 x 1.5 threads. Check 
the Machinery’s Handbook for complete information on thread forms. 
2. Turn off all layers except the Rod Sketch and Rod Solid layers and make the Rod Solid layer the active 
layer. Revolve the Rod Sketch. 
3. Turn on the External Threading Tool and Helix Path Layers, Make the Helix Path layer the active layer. 
Select the Helix tool and then select the Center snap point of the end of the rod. 
4. Then select the intersection of the corner of the cutting tool as the base radius. Press enter to accept the 
same distance at the top radius. 
5. RMB (Right Mouse Button) select turn Height and enter a height of 1.5 for the pitch of the thread. 
6. And then track along the axis going a couple of turns beyond the end of the rod. 
7. Start the sweep tool and select the cutting tool sketch. Then RMB and select Alignment and No. Select 
the Helical path. 
8. If you are going to rapid prototype the part via an stl file you might want to make a copy of the thread 
cut shifted along the axis the desired clearance distance. 
9. Subtract the Sweep and make sure the rod is on the Rod Solid Layer and turn off the other layers. 
10. Turn off the layers except the Nut Sketch and Nut Solid Layers and make the Nut, Solid layer the active 
layer. 
11. Extrude the hexagon to the center of the second circle. 
12. Press pull the hole through the part. 
13. Extrude the larger circle that is tangent to the hexagon with a taper of 45 deg. 
14. Use the intersection tool to derive the intersection between the two solids. This cuts a chamfer on the nut. 
15. Repeat the same procedure on the other side. 
16. Add a 0.75mm chamfer to both ends of the hole in the nut. 
17. Turn the internal threading tool layer on. Create a new helix path for the internal threading tool. 
18. Sweep the cut tool and subtract as was done with the external thread. 
19. That completes the internal and external cur threads or the use of threading symbol. 
 
 
TITLE BLOCK: 
1. First, locate or download a Title Block template. There are some basic templates that are already included 
in the AutoCAD or from the Download Finder Page. 
2. Open up a blank drawing and click on the “Layout” tab or Right-click on the Layout 1 and select Page 
Setup Manager to enter your plot settings. 
  
12  
 
For Windows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For Mac: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Click “Modify” to open the dialog box. The most important thing to pay attention to is the paper size, so 
make sure to set it up so that it matches the size of the Title Block template. 
Select “Landscape” on the Drawing Orientation panel and hit “OK”. 
4. Click on the “Insert” tab and then on the “Insert” button on the far left side of the ribbon. 
13  
5. For Windows: 
 
 
For Mac: 
 
From the pop up menu, click on Browse and select your template. Leave the check boxes as they are and only 
check the “Specify on screen” box. Click “OK”. 
 
For Windows: 
 
  
14  
For Mac: 
 
6. Position the Title Block. Note that the dashed line represents the print border, so position the Title Block 
within it. 
7. Save the layout template. See the following documentation To Save a Layout